[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>There are three
cities in Peru that
were inhabited in Inca times
that are still inhabited today.
Cusco is one of them.
Another city that was
inhabited in Inca times,
and is still inhabited today,
is a town called Choquechaca,
which means gold storage.
And it is a small town
way in the mountains.
The third town that was
inhabited in Inca times
and is still inhabited today
is this town, Ollantaytambo.
Ollantaytambo's a
very special town.
It's a megalithic town.
Perhaps it was built many
thousands of years ago.
It has many great
doorways and super walls.
Follow me, and
we'll explore some
of the alleys of Ollantaytambo.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Check out some of these huge
cornerstone blocks here.
Truly megalithic
city, Ollantaytambo.
Yeah, you see some really well
constructed megalithic doorways
here at the village
of Ollantaytambo.
And like in Inca times, water
flowed down the streets just
like here.
And every street, in
fact, in Ollantaytambo
had man-made
streams flowing down
either along the
side of the street
or in the middle of the street.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We've hiked up the terraces
to nearly the top of the Sun
Temple here at Ollantaytambo.
And it's this section
where we start
to see the awesome megalithic
stones, some of them weighing
100 tons or more.
An earlier episode on ancient
technology in Peru and Bolivia,
we showed how the
builders of Ollantaytambo
were the same builders
who built Tiahuanaco.
And that was because
of the keystone cuts
that are found both at
Tiahuanaco and Pumapunku
and here at Ollantaytambo.
So we've returned here
to Ollantaytambo in Peru
to look at more evidence
of ancient technology.
So follow me through
this ancient fortress
to look at the incredible
evidence for ancient machining.
So here at the top
of the Sun Temple
is the famous megalithic wall.
And all around us
are giant blocks
of red granite, andesite.
They've been hewn from a quarry
up on this mountain many miles
away, and somehow
dragged across the river
and then up on top of this hill.
And yet, the builders never
finished their construction,
and these giant 100-ton
blocks are still
lying here unfinished,
and they haven't been
put into their final place.
Something happened here that
stopped their construction,
some cataclysm, some
end of a civilization
where the builders just
abandoned their work.
And what we see left are these
giant stones scattered around
here at Ollantaytambo.
As we come around here on the
east side of the Sun Temple,
again, we see the
large granite blocks.
But then we see the crummy
filler blocks with mud.
Another giant block.
This is one of the largest.
It has these unusual
knobs coming out,
and we don't know
what that's for.
This block too is notched here
for another gigantic granite
block to be fitted,
but it's not here.
Instead, we have these
crummy filler blocks.
This is really
Inca construction.
And what was meant to be here
originally, and probably was,
were other big blocks
of perfectly cut granite
fitted into this
notch, coming down here
in a narrow piece of
finely cut granite.
But that's not what we see.
Instead, we see this crummy
Inca construction filler.
More of it here and here.
This is the Inca construction,
but these giant blocks
are the pre-Inca, megalithic
builders' construction.
This is the same people who
built Tiahuanaco and Pumapunku.
We can really see
here at Ollantaytambo
how Machu Picchu and Saqsaywaman
and Cusco are all pre-Inca.
They're built thousands
of years before the Incas.
Then they were destroyed,
even perhaps several times
in wars or cataclysmic
Earth changes.
Later, the Incas did
occupy these buildings
and repaired them
as best they could
with this kind of construction.
Here's the most famous
of all here at the Sun
Temple of Ollantaytambo.
Giant 100-ton blocks of granite.
And what's so unusual are
these thin strips of granite
that are filling in
between the giant blocks.
My theory is that at one
time, most of the building
had these giant blocks with
thin strips of finely cut
granite between them.
But many of these thin
strips have either
been pried out by people or
through earthquake activity,
leaving gaps between the large
blocks, although not here.
And then they were later filled
in with the crummy small stones
that we see on many sides
of the Sun Temple here.
Come around to this
side, and we'll
see what is a very
unusual keystone cut that
is part of the wall here.
But it's a vertical
keystone cut,
so it can't be in
its original place.
It's a block that must have been
moved and then later filled in.
Follow me.
This wall was destroyed
at some point,
but then what
happened was it was
rebuilt by the megalith
builders themselves.
They, for instance, put
this large block into place.
And curiously, it has
also a T-shaped keystone
cut right here.
However, this can't have
been the original spot
for this stone, or
certainly it wasn't
meant to be here, because these
T-shaped keystone cuts would
have had to have been
on a flat surface
so that the molten
metal would have been
poured into the keystone cut.
And there always has to be
a corresponding keystone
cut on another block.
So it appears that this
building has been rebuilt twice.
Once by the megalith
builders themselves
who put this block
in a second place
from where it had originally
been, but then later
the Incas filled in this
space between the large blocks
with these small crummy stones,
and even mud filling here.
This weighs so much that even
today, a modern construction
company in Peru couldn't
really move or build
with such giant
blocks like this.
And you have to ask yourself,
why would the Incas or anyone
want to build with
such giant blocks
when it would have been
so much easier for them
to build with these small
blocks like we see here?
It appears that what would be
so difficult for us was somehow
easy for these builders.
Did they have some
kind of levitation,
some kind of
anti-gravity that could
vibrate these crystalline
blocks, make them weightless,
move them around effortlessly?
Even then they would have needed
to probably cut these blocks
with giant saws, some
kind of power tools
in order to build in this way.
That's how we would build
in a modern situation today.
But yet, the lifting of
giant blocks like this
would require huge cranes and
other massive infrastructure.
It really begs the
question, why are
they trying to build in
such a difficult way?
Was it actually easy for them?
Here's another one of
the giant granite blocks
here at Ollantaytambo.
And this is the
tell-tale T-shaped cut
known as a keystone cut.
And this is what we see at
Pumapunku, also at Tiahuanaco.
And we see it here
at Ollantaytambo.
These unusual cuts are
made in these giant blocks.
And another corresponding T cut
would be on another giant block
here, and then molten
metals are poured
into these keystone cuts.
This is kind of unusual
architecture and construction
that we see all over the world
on certain megalithic blocks,
not only here in Peru,
but also in Bolivia.
We see it in Egypt,
in Angkor Wat.
We see it in Com and
My Son in Vietnam.
We see it in India and
even in Greece and Turkey.
This is the sign of the
ancient megalithic builders
who were building
around the world.
These are the blocks
here on the lower terrace
that have been blown
apart from the walls.
And look at this.
Here's another
T-shaped keystone cut.
I hadn't seen this one before.
It too is on a finely cut block.
So this block, which has
been nicely cut and dressed,
very sharp corners, very smooth.
And we see another keystone
cut here at this far edge
right here.
It too would have been,
when originally placed,
would have been turned so the
keystone cuts would have been
on a flat surface,
and then they would
have had to have been fitted
to another giant granite block
with also a T-shaped
keystone cut on it.
These blocks themselves are
evidence that the Incas did not
build Ollantaytambo, but that
this site was built thousands
of years before the
Incas, and the Incas later
occupied this site
and rebuilt as best
they could some of the walls.
Here behind me on this mountain,
across the Urubamba River that
goes down to Machu Picchu,
we see the mountain
where the quarry is located.
Several miles away
up here, there
are giant squared rectangular
blocks of granite.
They've been cut from
the mountainside.
They've been hewn.
There's even evidence of
giant saws being in use.
Many of the blocks
are still up there.
They were never moved
from the quarry,
or they weren't moved very far.
Yet hundreds of these
giant granite blocks
were dragged from the
top of this mountain,
down a series of trails,
across the river,
through these fields, and then
up on top of this mountain
to be placed here at the
site of the Sun Temple.
Yet many of these stones
were never put into place,
or conversely, they were
blasted apart from their walls
and scattered apart.
Like below me, you can see many
giant squared granite blocks.
This too in my mind is
evidence of the ancient wars
of the past, and the cataclysmic
changes that occurred thousands
of years ago.
Shortly, we'll be
leaving on horseback,
and we'll be crossing the river.
It will take us many hours.
We'll be following this trail
on the other side of the river,
along this hillside.
Will be switchbacking
along the trails,
high up onto this mountain
where the quarry is
located about 1,000 feet up.
There we'll see many
of these huge granite
blocks, many of them
apparently cut by giant saws.
There's amazing
acoustics here too,
where sound carries
a great deal.
Even it was possible
that sound was
used for levitating and
moving some of these blocks.
Some of the finest stone
construction work in the world
is seen right here.
From here, we'll be
taking this Inca trail up
to the top of the
mountain, or near it
to the great megalithic
quarry here at Ollantaytambo.
It's there that we'll see
evidence of ancient machining,
including evidence
of a giant saw.
And we'll also see a
huge round stone wheel.
So now we're saddled up, and
we're headed up to Cachicata.
Cachicata is the great
megalithic quarry
up on the mountain.
So we're here at Cachicata,
the great megalithic quarry
on the mountain
above Ollantaytambo.
Here you can see
the giant blocks
of granite scattered around
on the hillside behind me.
In a few moments,
we're going to look
at some of these giant stones
that have been squared,
ready to be moved
down the mountain.
Some of these stones
weigh 100 tons.
The best stones were
already removed from here
and taken down the mountain,
across the Urubamba River,
and then up the other
side to the Sun Temple
at Ollantaytambo.
What we're going to
see now is amazing.
We'll see evidence
of giants saws that
were cutting the stones.
We'll see a huge
round stone, proving
that the ancient peoples of
the Andes knew about the wheel,
and in fact, made
giant stone wheels.
There are a number
of enigmas here
at the quarry at Ollantaytambo.
How did they cut the stones?
Were they using power
tools, as we surmise?
And then after they had squared
off these giant 100-ton stones,
how were they able to move
them down the mountain?
To us, it seems
incredibly difficult
that they did any of this.
And yet, we almost
have to look at it
as if it was easy
for them, that they
had some kind of levitation,
some sort of anti-gravity
means of levitating the
stones, making them weightless,
and then moving them
down the mountain.
So follow me now as we look at
some of the megalithic stones
here at Cachicata.
Here we are at part
of the rock scree
at the quarry at Ollantaytambo,
and our guide Wilson
is showing us a cave with
some Inca mummies in it.
He's saying that there
was an earthquake here
about 15 years ago that
caused some of these rocks
to come down, and then
this cave was discovered.
The mummies inside are
several hundred years old.
Probably from around the
time of the conquest.
Here, let's have a look.
Here's an unusual stone here
at the quarry at Ollantaytambo.
This one here, you can
see very smooth here.
This is one of the
stones that I believe
was cut with the giant
saws that they used here
at Ollantaytambo.
There's really no other
way that a stone like this
could be sliced so smooth
and such a large piece.
We'll see in a
minute another stone
in which the giant saws
were cutting at it,
only they stopped.
This is a piece of granite
that was sliced off just
like a piece of
bread by a giant saw.
Here's another stone that's
been sliced by the giant saw.
You can see here the
saw was cutting in.
This is a piece that
broke off, actually.
Had a natural crack in it.
But right here is where the
saw was cutting into it.
For reasons we don't know,
they never moved these stones.
But of course, many hundreds
of these giant stones
were moved down the mountain
and across the Urubamba River
to the great fortress
at Ollantaytambo.
This is a natural cave
here up at the quarry,
and stones have
been piled here just
to make a shelter for a
llama or alpaca herder.
But right in this area,
according to our guide Wilson,
there's a cache
of Inca treasure,
some kind of gold
hoard that was buried
with one of the Inca royalty,
or something like that.
The Incas would
make gold figurines
of llamas and peanuts
and even corn,
and bury it with the
important people.
And according to
our guide Wilson,
all of the stones at the
Sun Temple of Ollantaytambo
have come from this quarry.
And this is a
special type of stone
that's only found here
around this mountain.
It's not found actually in
the town of Ollantaytambo.
It's a type of
crystalline granite.
And this kind of granite is
not just very hard and heavy,
but it's a kind of granite
that would resonate as well.
Tiny quartz crystals
are embedded
in all of these stones.
And in fact, that may have
been one of the reasons
that these stones
were chosen is because
of its crystalline quality,
this kind of stone,
perhaps, could be
levitated more easily
with the anti-gravity
devices that I
suspect that they
had in order to move
the really large stones.
Here at the quarry is one
of the most unusual stones.
In fact, according to our
guide, this is unique,
and you do not find a
circular round stone
like this down at the Sun
Temple of Ollantaytambo.
But clearly, this was made here.
It's got a hole in the
middle for an axle.
Almost looks like some
giant Fred Flintstone stone
wheel or something.
The front of it
here is very smooth.
It's like the giant saw blade
just came down and sliced
this stone.
Then it was machined and
bashed into a circle.
One of the strange
things about this stone
too is it's said that the
Incas and other ancient peoples
of the Andes didn't
know about the wheel.
And yet, here at the
quarry at Ollantaytambo,
they made a giant stone
wheel that weighs many tons.
You have to wonder what
this stone wheel was for.
Was it actually part of the
way that they moved some
of the giant 100-ton stones?
Why the axle in the middle?
Perhaps it was to be a grinding
stone in a mill, as often used
in Europe and other places.
And Wilson here is saying
that this round tubular stone
is an axle.
Here, Wilson.
Try and pick this up here.
Yeah.
So was this part of the axle
that was meant for this stone?
Perhaps there were two.
What would this have been
some giant megalithic stone
cart or something?
It's baffling, really, what
the purpose of this stone was,
and even how it was made.
Now just right over here, we'll
see the amazing giant stone
that still has the saw marks
from the huge circular blade
that was slicing
these giant granite
blocks like a loaf of bread.
So it looks like with the
giant saws here at the quarry,
they began to square
off this massive piece
of 100-ton granite.
Even 200 tons.
They began cutting
the face here.
They also began squaring
it off this side.
There's another beginnings
of a saw mark here.
Perfectly straight.
Here's the main piece
where they, again,
began to slice off about
an eight-inch thin piece
of granite right here.
And you can still see the
remains of the saw mark.
Also, the lichen patches
on the stone are huge.
In my estimation, this
town has been sitting here
in a quarry for many
thousands of years.
So we've seen quite a bit
here at the great quarry
at Ollantaytambo.
Evidence of ancient
machining, giant stones
that were sliced with
saws and never moved down
from the quarry.
It's getting late now, so
we'll have to start down.
Here's even another stone
that was sawn off perhaps
from this block.
It too was never
moved from the quarry,
though it was squared
and ready to go.
At some point, the building
and all of the quarrying
here just came to a stop
thousands of years ago.
Perhaps it was the
end of a great war
or some natural cataclysm that
just stopped all of the work
here at Ollantaytambo.
These are some of
the giant walls
at Saqsaywaman, the megalithic
fortress above Cusco.
The stone used here is limestone
rather than granite, as
at Ollantaytambo.
In some areas like
here, earthquakes
have begun to split the
stone open, pulling it apart.
But originally, and
even in most cases,
today, the stones are
perfectly fitted together.
Plus they have this
curious pillow shaping.
We see this in other areas
of the world, including
the underwater stones at
Bimini in the Bahamas,
known as the Bimini
Road of Atlantis.
What's interesting too to
note here at Saqsaywaman
with these massive walls
is how they've done corners
with stones that are
coming around the corner,
still perfectly fitted in these
polygonal jigsaw patterns.
You see here in
some places where
some of the megalithic
stones are missing,
and modern Peruvian
archaeologists
have had to reconstruct
parts of the wall.
Yet even though
today's archaeologists
have at their disposal modern
equipment, cranes, modern power
saws, and things like that,
they still use very small stones
to build.
Where, in fact, they would be
replacing perhaps one or maybe
two giant stones, yet they've
used probably somewhere
between 20 and 30 small stones.
So it begs the question, why
were the megalith builders
using such large stones
when even today's architects
and engineers are using very
small stones to replace it?
One of the reasons why is
building with such large stones
is extremely difficult,
even for today's engineers
and architects.
And so in fact, they're
building, as we would today,
with much smaller stones.
It makes me wonder,
was it somehow easy
for the megalith builders to
build with such large stones?
It was easy for them
to quarry these stones.
to cut these stones.
And then it was easy for
them to move these stones
and place them in these giant
walls that we see today.
Many archaeologists
think that Saqsaywaman
was a pre-Inca building.
And just as today in
Cusco, the modern Spanish
are inhabiting
buildings that were
built a long time before
them, and the Spanish
did not build those buildings.
It's also a theory
that the Incas
also inhabited buildings
that were already built.
Buildings such as Saqsaywaman.
This is one of the most
famous walls at Saqsaywaman,
and it's famous because
carved into the wall
appears to be a serpent.
And in fact, there
are seven holes here.
One, two, three, four,
five, six, seven.
And it's thought by some people
that what this corresponds to
is the Kundalini
energy that's talked
about by the ancient Hindus.
And the Kundalini energy
goes through the spine
and corresponds to seven
chakras in our body,
and that this is the serpent
with the chakras carved
into this stone.
One of the strange
stories about Saqsaywaman
is that part of
the lost treasure
of the Incas from the
ancient Sun Temple,
the Coricancha in Cusco, was
taken into a secret tunnel
system inside the mountain of
Saqsaywaman where we are now.
And in fact, this area
is a newly excavated part
of Saqsaywaman.
I'm already underground here.
And this is apparently
one of the ancient tunnels
that once riddled the
entire megalithic fortress
of Saqsaywaman.
So follow me, and we'll
go inside the tunnel
system of this ancient
megalithic fortress.
Now you can see how this
tunnel here at Saqsaywaman
is also lined with stones.
And here, the roof has caved
in, so we can see the sky.
But then as we continue farther,
we have the roof once again.
And we're clearly inside of
a man-made tunnel system.
See?
You can see blocks of stone.
You can see stone up here that's
part of the roof of the tunnel.
At one time, this
tunnel may have
led to the lost
treasure of the Incas,
but today, it dead
ends down here
inside this dark passageway.
Here on this backside of
the Saqsaywaman fortress,
you see also these curious
stones that are carved out.
Some kind of, like,
seats are made.
It looks almost like a throne
for a giant or something.
There's other places
around here where
there's upside down stairways.
It's very well cut,
the stone here.
It almost looks like someone has
taken a power tool or some kind
of laser cutter, and
just cut out the stone,
almost as if they
were practicing.
Other areas seem as if they're
for other giant blocks,
such as this one, to be placed
into various niches and things
like that where part
of some structure
would have been originally,
and now has been completely
dismantled, possibly in some
kind of cataclysmic Earth
changes or even some
catastrophic war.
This is another area here
in the back of Saqsaywaman
where it appears like an
upside down staircase has
been cut into this rock.
This area too, very
straight walls right here.
And you have to ask yourself,
what were they doing here?
Why even carve this
rock like this?
It's like this rock even was
perhaps not where it is now,
and has been turned
over in some topsy-turvy
cataclysm or something that's
flipped this rock over.
We see more of the cuts here.
Down over here
too, it's been cut.
It's really pretty
baffling, really.
You have to ask yourself,
why are they doing it?
And then once again, it looks
as if they're using power tools
and saws to cut it
at the various angles
and articulate it so
finely, as we can see.
This is Cusco, the ancient
capital of the Incas.
Just to the north of Cusco
is the Sacred Valley.
And this has the cities
of Calca, Uki, Urubamba,
and Ollantaytambo.
Through the Sacred Valley
goes the Urubamba River.
That river flows farther
down into the high jungle
to Machu Picchu, also a
megalithic city like Cusco.
All around Cusco are many
fascinating megalithic sites.
It's one of the great
cities of the world.
And today, it's the
number one tourist
spot in all of South America.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[SINGING]
[CAR HORN]
We're here at the main
plaza in Ica, Peru.
And here in this plaza
is the central plaza
here in Ica, Peru.
And in fact, one of the
strangest museums in the world
is the Museum of Dr.
Cabrera right here.
Follow me as we go inside.
It's closed most of the
time, and it's only open now
by special appointment.
Most of the people here in
Ica have heard of this museum,
but they rarely go inside here.
Follow me into Dr.
Cabrera's cabinet
of curiosities, one of the
strangest museums in the world.
Inside these five rooms,
Dr. Cabrera's Museum,
are thousands,
tens of thousands,
even maybe hundreds
of thousands of rocks,
carved stones,
petrified objects.
And carved onto them are some
of the most bizarre scenes
imaginable.
Dinosaurs, people doing
surgical operations,
people looking in
telescopes, oddball animals,
and other scenes.
It's an incredible collection
of weirdness and impossible
things.
Let's have a look.
Here's the doctor himself.
He passed away some
years ago, and now it
is his wife who still runs this
private museum here in Ica.
Dr. Cabrera would sit here at
his desk among his many stones.
He was the ancestor
of one of the founders
of this city in Peru.
Dr. Cabrera was a very
well-known citizen here in Ica.
He was a surgeon.
He was a wealthy landowner.
And he was a collector
of the very strange rocks
that are found nearby.
These rocks in Ica were actually
found at a nearby town called
Ocucaje.
They've come from a
secret underground area,
according to the doctor.
And some of the rocks
include bizarre scenes
of prehistoric animals, humans
interacting with animals,
other scenes of people
with telescopes, performing
operations, including heart
surgery and trepanning,
and things like that.
Many of the rocks
are very small.
Others are medium-sized.
While other rocks are huge
boulders like this one.
Some of the scenes,
we can't really
tell what people are doing.
Others, it's quite
clear that they're
performing some operation,
looking at the stars,
or perhaps attacking
what would appear
to be dinosaurs and things.
Let's look at this one here.
What seems to be a brontosaurus
or some other kind of dinosaur,
a man with an axe
is battling it.
Dr. Cabrera himself believed
that many of these stones
were somehow created during
the Mesozoic period, a time
60 million years ago when
humans did not exist,
according to the mainstream,
but dinosaurs did.
Here in Dr. Cabrera's
office, he's
got many photographs
of his expeditions
and some of the
famous people who've
come here to meet him
and see his museum,
including Shirley
MacLaine, the actress here.
Photo taken in probably the
late 1970s with Dr. Cabrera.
Here he sits at his desk.
This is only a small portion
of the many thousands
of rocks he has.
Here also we see what seems
to be some prehistoric animal.
Also another man here riding
on some kind of stegosaurus.
Skeptics have said that
Dr. Cabrera was sincere,
but that he was gullible,
and that local peasants
in the nearby village of
Ocucaje took advantage of him.
And he was quite wealthy,
so he would pay them
a small price for each of
these rocks that they found.
And so it's said that the
local people actually created
these rocks for the doctor.
The doctor himself,
though, believed
that all of these
rocks were genuine,
although a few might
have been faked.
It was his belief that these
stones were 60 million or 70
million years old,
and that human beings
had lived at a time of the
dinosaurs that long ago.
Other researchers who
believe that the stones here
in Dr. Cabrera's museum
are authentic, their belief
is that dinosaurs didn't become
extinct 65 million years ago,
and that dinosaurs somehow
managed to survive down
through the ages to the
time of human beings,
and that perhaps these
stones are only 10,000
years old or 20,000 years old.
And much like the Loch Ness
Monster or the Mokele-mbembe
in the Congo, we have
stories of giant saurians
living throughout the
ages in small numbers
and still surviving.
Another curious collection
that is like Dr. Cabrera's is
the strange collection of
ceramics at Acambaro, Mexico.
These ceramics also show people
interacting with what would
seem to be extinct dinosaurs.
Let's go into some of the
other rooms of Dr. Cabrera's
strange cabinet of curiosities.
One of the strange stones
seems to show two people inside
of a wheeled vehicle, and
it's being drawn by a horse.
Horses weren't known
in South America
until the time of
the Spanish conquest,
so perhaps this is an
indication that these stones
were made more recently.
Some of the stones
are figures at Nazca
such as the monkey
with the spiral
tail, the spider, the condor.
Some of the other
familiar figures that we
can see from the air at Nazca.
Were the figures at Nazca
also ancient figures
from the time of the dinosaurs,
as Dr. Cabrera believed?
Or again, perhaps
the dinosaurs lived
in South America up until
relatively modern times,
like 10,000 or 20,000 years ago.
Or as many people suggest,
the entire collection
is a fake, a hoax that
was pulled on Dr. Cabrera.
Dr. Cabrera himself completely
believed that all of this
was real.
All of it was somehow
incredibly ancient.
Some of Dr. Cabrera's
large stones in this room
seem to show the world maps
with different continents.
Dr. Cabrera believed
that some showed
where Atlantis had been and
other lost continents and South
America.
He had his own interpretation
of many of the stones.
And yet, a lot of them were
very clear of what they showed.
Prehistoric animals,
people interacting
with them or each other.
Yet some of the stones show
things that were very obscure.
We don't know what
their meaning was.
This is the Regional
Museum here in Ica.
Inside are artifacts
from the Paracas
culture, the Ica culture,
the Nazca culture,
including some of the
most unusual skulls
of cranial deformation
seen anywhere in the world.
Follow me inside the
Ica Regional Museum.
Here in the Ica
Regional Museum we
see some unusual skulls,
including red-haired skull
here.
Red-haired people being
thought from northern Europe,
typically, and not
here in South America.
And over here, we have the very
strange cranial deformation
that we find here all over
South America, especially Peru.
You can see the very
elongated, deformed heads,
some of the most unusual
that we find here
around Paracas, Nazca, and Ica.
This was done by
taking small babies
and wrapping their head
before their cranium had fused
together, and they create this
elongated head, or sometimes
a flattened head.
And over here, we
see other craniums
that have been trepanned.
Their heads are elongated too
and deformed in many ways,
but then they've had
their skulls cut open
while they were alive.
Possibly their skulls had been
damaged in battle by a mace,
or perhaps it was even some
kind of brain surgery because
of headaches or something.
And then a gold or silver
plate was put onto their head,
and then their cranium
and skull was healed over
and skin formed over
the gold plates.
Cranial deformation is one
of the most common things
around the world.
Ancient peoples
in Malta, Vanuatu,
the Kurds in northern
Iraq, in Egypt,
such as Akhenaten and Nefertiti,
and here in South America.
Cranial deformation,
creating these cone heads.
Why was this unusual technique
done around the world?
Modern archaeologists
say it's simply
a coincidence, and the fact
that people on Africa and South
America, even in North America,
in Europe, in the Middle East
all did this
cranial deformation.
Is there really some connection
between these ancient cultures?
This would mean
transoceanic travel
across the Pacific
and the Atlantic,
bringing this unusual technique
of elongating the heads.
And why did they do it?
Why was it that
ancient people wanted
these strange, elongated heads?
Was it because they were trying
to imitate some ancient people,
even possibly extraterrestrials
who naturally looked like this?
In many cases, like
we see here, they
had literally doubled
the cranium capacity,
thereby allowing their brains
to be twice the size of ours
today.
Were they somehow
smarter than we are
and better psychic abilities?
Here we have a diorama of
a person being trepanned.
It's quite possible
that he's a cone
head with cranial deformation.
And for whatever reason,
his scalp is being cut away,
and bones in his head
are being cut out.
Like many, he survived
this ancient operation
and went on to
live for many years
with a gold plate in his head.
Here we have the
rare Inca quipus.
The Incas were said
to not have writing.
It's also said they didn't
have the wheel either.
What they did have were the
quipu, these knotted ropes.
And each knot and strand
had a special meaning.
They could use it for
counting, for sending messages,
communicating through
long distances.
And this was the way that
the Incas kept records.
Some quipus are incredibly
large and long because
of the complicated messages.
Hiram Bingham, who
discovered Machu Picchu,
writes in his book that there
was a legend that the Incas did
have writing originally.
But what happened was
there was a plague
going throughout
the Inca empire,
and priests came to
the Inca, the king,
and they said that the
cause of this plague
was writing and the
trafficking of books.
At that time, according
to Hiram Bingham,
the Incas forbade
any kind of writing
and then switched to the unusual
quipu system of keeping records
on knotted ropes.
Here at the Regional
Museum in Ica
is actually a copy of the
Nazca lines on the Nazca plain.
So you can get kind of a good
perspective on how they look.
It's just a copy, but right now,
we're off to the real thing,
the lines that Nazca.
We're here now in
the town of Ocucaje,
a small village near to Ica.
This is where the stones in
Dr. Cabrera's strange museum
came from.
I found these guys here
at the local cantina,
and they say they're
going to show
us the local house and
museum, they're calling it,
where Dr. Cabrera's
stones came from.
We're walking through the town
of Ocucaje with my friends.
We're going to find the source
of Dr. Cabrera's stones.
That's our plan.
We're here at a man's
house in Ocucaje,
a very small
village near to Ica.
Between Ica and Nazca, actually.
We've just met Arturo who is
the caretaker of this museum,
and he says he's
going to show us
some of the rocks that came
here from this secret place
in Ocucaje.
And this is supposedly the
origin of all the rocks
that Dr. Cabrera has in
his strange museum in Ica.
Arturo's going to show us
some of his inner rooms here.
Uh-huh.
Wow.
>>[SPEAKING SPANISH]
>>All right.
What he's saying is
that there is a mountain
nearby here, the Cerro--
>>Las Lumadas.
>>The Cerro Las Lumadas,
the Mountain of Las Lumadas.
And there at that
place are these fossils
of these prehistoric animals.
And he's saying they're
300 million years old.
OK, continue.
This is the head of a dinosaur
and part of the vertebrae,
and that this is a baby
dinosaur here with the head
and some vertebrae.
Hm.
Interesante.
He found these fossilized
vertebrae and part
of a chest cavity here
in a different place,
but also nearby.
And he's saying he found
six fossilized dinosaur
eggs, such as this one right
here would be one of them.
He's saying that
this stone he found--
and this is like Dr.
Cabrera's stones in that--
yeah.
It has been engraved
very similar
to Dr. Cabrera's stones.
And it clearly shows
what is some kind
of long-necked
brontosaurus-type dinosaur.
Fire is, like, coming out
of his mouth or something.
Yeah.
His tail is wrapping
down around this way.
Here's his body.
It has the same kind of etchings
as Dr. Cabrera's stones.
Here's his head
going out this way.
So he's saying also that this
stone is an authentic stone
that he found.
He's saying it's Neolithic.
So perhaps he's saying here
that people either witnessed
dinosaurs here somehow in
very, very ancient times,
or somehow perhaps
they saw fossils
of some of the dinosaurs
and engraved the stone.
So Arturo?
>>Si?
>>[SPEAKING SPANISH]
>>OK, OK.
So I asked him if he made this
stone, and he's saying no.
He is saying this is an
authentic, original stone
that he has found in this
area like these other fossils.
So Arturo--
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
>>[SPEAKING SPANISH]
>>OK, OK.
So he's saying that
a man before him
was selling these
stones to Dr. Cabrera.
According to him, he thinks
that many of the stones
are authentic, but
perhaps many are fake.
He's saying he doesn't know
whether all the stones in Dr.
Cabrera's museum are authentic.
Here's a mummy.
This mummy also has red hair.
Yeah.
He's a red-haired mummy.
This guy has quite the
private collection here.
And this is the last room here
in Arturo's private museum,
and it also contains
some mummies.
In fact, they also
have red hair.
And there are some--
apparently mummies
of llamas and things.
Also, here are some
shuttles for weaving
and some ropes and /
these would be only, say,
800 years old, or
something like that.
Maybe only 500 or 600.
So Arturo's got quite
a collection here.
Some things are
500, 600 years old.
Others he says, are
many, many millions
of years old, including
the one rock that's
very similar to those
in Dr. Cabrera's museum.
Well, it's pretty interesting
and baffling in a way.
I mean, certainly
a lot of the stuff
here is clearly authentic.
And yet you still have to wonder
about Dr. Cabrera's stones
and the stone he showed us.
Arturo's basically saying
that the dinosaurs around here
lived 65 million years
ago, but that they
survived down to Neolithic
times, say, 20,000 years or so.
And that they got
smaller and smaller,
so they weren't the
same giant dinosaurs.
So it's his theory, which was
different than Dr. Cabrera's,
that people weren't living
65 million years ago,
but rather, dinosaurs somehow
survived in this area,
and that it would have
been a different climate.
And that people were somehow
witnessing real reptiles.
Well, Arturo, muchos
gracias para es.
Ah, gracias.
This village and the strange
artifacts that are found here
are Earth-shatteringly changing
the history of the world,
and of humanity, and
of Darwin and you
said, Schuler, and many of the
paleontologists' beliefs of man
and reptiles and
fossilization and extinction,
and even where man originated.
That the secrets of all this can
be found here and around this
small village, and that the
evidence that he has found--
and Dr. Cabrera apparently
put some of it in his museum--
that this really changes our
ideas of where we came from,
where man originated.
And what Arturo is
basically saying
is that humanity has originated
in this area of Peru,
and would have been apparently
even millions of years ago.
That this is where human beings
came from and originated.
So we've seen the
strange museum here
at Ocucaje, small
village near Ica.
This is the village where Dr.
Cabrera's bizarre collection
originated from.
He was paying villagers to
collect these stones for him.
Some of the stones
apparently are authentic,
while others of the stones were
apparently replicas and fakes
that were sold to Dr. Cabrera.
We may never really
know the truth
of the origin of Dr.
Cabrera's strange collection
and how authentic or
fake it was, and just
exactly what Dr. Cabrera knew.
That concludes it for here.
And for now, we'll
get back and head
on to the Pan-American Highway.
Go further south to Nazca and
the strange figures etched
in the desert.
We're here at the
famous Nazca plain.
This is where the lines
and geoglyphs, trapezoids,
other geometric figures
are etched into the desert.
The Nazca Desert is covered
with small black rocks,
and it makes it
appear very dark.
The way the ancient peoples
made the lines at Nazca
was by scraping away this
top layer of dark rocks
and exposing a shallow line
or groove that was very light
colored.
Therefore, from the
air, or possibly
from a nearby mountain, some
of the lines and geoglyphs
could be seen.
And they look as light-colored
lines on a dark-colored desert.
What is really
mysterious about Nazca
is not so much how the
lines were made, but why,
and who did it?
One of the strange things about
the Nazca lines and geoglyphs
is that they're really only
well seen from the air.
Today, hundreds of tourists
fly around the Nazca plain
every morning and afternoon
to view the incredible lines
and geoglyphs that are
etched in an area for tens
of square miles.
We're on the observation
tower here at Nazca.
And behind me, you can see
part of the Nazca plain,
including one of the
figures called The Hands.
Some researchers think
that it's actually a bat.
But the Nazca plain
goes for miles
in many directions between
the towns of Nazca and Palpa.
It's a very interesting
idea that these lines
here at Nazca and
Palpa were really meant
for people to view from the
air, just like we do today.
Every day, hundreds
of tourists get
into airplanes at
the Nazca airport
and fly over these lines.
Is it possible that in ancient
times, people also had flight?
It's been speculated here that
the ancient Peruvians actually
built hot air balloons, and
they flew over the lines
in this way.
And yet, many ancient records
show that people had flight.
Some of the lines here at Nazca
start from these rocky hills.
The lines begin here,
and they go out for miles
out into the desert.
There they intersect with
other lines and trapezoids.
They also cross giant figures
of spiders and condors
and flamingos and
spirals, and other things.
It's a giant mass of
strange trapezoids, lines,
and geoglyphs.
And what their purpose
is remains a mystery.
From the top of
some of these hills,
you can see parts
of the Nazca lines
and some of the geoglyphs.
But to really appreciate the
vast geometric figures here
at Nazca, you've really
got to go up in an airplane
and view them from 300
or 400 feet in the air.
Well, we've been able to see
portions of the Nazca lines
from this hilltop, but now
it's time to go to the airport
and get into an airplane and
fly above the many figures
and mysterious lines that we
can only see from the air.
The Nazca lines were
first discovered in 1946
when an American flyer
named Paul Kosok was doing
some aerial surveys
here in Peru,
and it was he who first
flew over the Nazca plain
here and saw the lines
and geoglyphs that
are so famous today.
Later, the famous German
archaeologist Maria Reiche
came here to Nazca and lived
here for over 30 years,
studying the Nazca
lines and the geoglyphs,
trying to get some kind of
indication of their purpose
and meaning.
She decided, as other
researchers have,
that at least part
of the Nazca lines
have to do with
astrological symbols.
They believe that certain animal
figures that are on the ground
are reflections of
constellations in the sky.
The problem here, though,
is that while some of these
might be constellations,
it doesn't explain
the over 10,000 lines that
go through the desert,
the trapezoids, things
that look like runways,
other spirals and intersecting
lines and geoglyphs.
What was their purpose?
We're here at the Nazca
airport, and we're
going to interview
Eduardo Herron, one
of the well-known
pilots here at Nazca.
And he's the discoverer
of some of the glyphs.
We're going to ask
him what he thinks
about the Nazca plain and about
some of his latest discoveries.
>>Welcome to Nazca
in this moment.
And I flew over the
Nazca lines for 31 years.
I've discovered in the
last years 354 designs.
My first discovery was in
1991, and the last discovery
is one month ago in Ica.
It's a big condor.
It's a beautiful, beautiful
[SPEAKING SPANISH].
And I talked to my friends
in the Peruvian [INAUDIBLE]
Institute and confirm
this new discovery.
No, they said, Paracas Cavernas.
It's all to Paracas Necropolis.
Probably 500 years BC.
It's very nice.
All the lines, in my
opinion, is the rituals.
The people needed water.
OK.
These are rituals for the sun,
the moon, the dancing gods,
and especially the condor.
Why?
The condors announce the
water is coming to the coast.
And then the next spirit for
the [INAUDIBLE] for the life
need the water.
Probably these are only
rituals for this purpose.
No, it's possible
the ancient Nazcas
used the textiles with
feathers for the big kites
and fly over the lines.
No?
The scientists said, why not?
OK.
But I remember the conference
in Mexico 10 years ago.
And it's a little--
it's a kite.
12 years, I don't remember
exactly [INAUDIBLE].
[INAUDIBLE], excuse me.
The unseen Nazcas don't
see the lines in this life.
The unseen Nazcas die and the
spirit is up and see the lines.
For me, no problem.
I can believe it.
But this-- why not, you know?
>>But humans also
have had flight.
I mean, like today we have
airplanes and airships
and, of course, big kites.
And could humans have
had somehow flight
in ancient times too?
>>Oh, yes, yes, yes.
For me-- you remember
the legends, you know?
And the Inca legends too.
You know, the Incas
have the big wings
and fly over the territories.
OK, well there are
many, many legends.
Why?
It's possible.
Yes.
For me, it's possible.
>>One of the interesting
things here at Nazca
is the aqueduct system
that's man-made.
It's deep underground.
It's made with a bunch
of rocks and lintels
that are holding in
the aqueduct system.
It's got these spiral
wells and paths
so that there's access to
this underground system that's
bringing water from the Andes
down into the Nazca valley,
and then bringing the water
out to irrigate the fields.
This system has been here
for almost 2,000 years,
it's thought.
And this aqueduct
system plays in one
of the theories of
the Nazca lines,
and that theory is that
the many aqueducts that
are throughout the Nazca valley
are somehow also marked by some
of the lines out in the desert.
This theory, however, very, very
partial, and many researchers
discount it altogether.
The aqueduct system
certainly does exist.
But the over 10,000
lines in the desert
would hardly seem to be marking
some aqueduct system, really.
Quite a few different theories
about the Nazca lines.
And maybe they
all have something
to do with the solution to this
seemingly unsolvable mystery.
We've got the talk of
astronomical alignments
and geoglyphs that are
constellations on the plain.
We've also heard theories
of water pathways
that are going
through the desert,
and perhaps some of
the lines actually
are marking some
of these aqueducts.
The lines were for
various rituals
that had to do with the
annual coming of the water.
And then we hear what are really
the more intriguing theories,
the ideas that the people
here could actually
fly in giant man-lifting
kites, perhaps
in some kind of primitive
balloon technology.
Or even the ideas that
somehow extraterrestrials
were coming here or that
even ancient man had
the ability of flight.
Use of vimanas.
Eduardo told us about
the many legends
of the birdmen of the Incas
and how they could fly.
So here we have the whole
concept of ancient technology
and the ancient
technology of flight.
Nearly everyone agrees that
the geoglyphs and the lines
and the trapezoids
and the spirals
and other strange figures
on the Nazca plain
were meant to be
seen from the air.
Were they meant to
be seen by vague gods
in the sky who could
be seen in the stars?
Or were they flesh-and-blood
gods who had flying machines
and could fly over the plain?
One thing is for certain.
The Nazca plain is
like a giant canvas
in the desert in
which all these lines
and figures and
geometric trapezoids
are etched onto
this vast landscape.
The question remains
though, who was it for?
One of the strange
legends here in Peru
is of an ancient tunnel system.
This tunnel system
is supposed to start
in Cusco around the
Temple of the Sun there,
and it goes to Saqsaywaman
and other areas in the Andes.
One of the legends is that the
ancient treasure of the Incas
was removed during the
time of the conquest
and put into this tunnel
system, at least for a while.
There are even stories that this
tunnel system goes for hundreds
of miles through the Andes and
down into the deserts of Peru.
Now we're on the
Pan-American Highway,
going through the
desert towards Ica,
and we've stopped here at
this roadside attraction
called Freedom Park.
Freedom Park here
kind of shows you
that you can have a museum
out here in the desert.
Just about anywhere
you want, really.
Mark is saying there's tektites
out here plus moldavite.
He's saying that
this whole area got
rained down with some
kind of meteoric shower
of melted stones and
glass and tektites.
Kind of makes you wonder if
maybe some ancient atomic war
was fought around here.
So Mark here is telling me
that he knew Dr. Cabrera who
passed away in 2001 in
Ica where we just were
and visiting his museum.
So I mean, you think he had his
own ideas and theories that he
wanted to show to
people, so he had
the rocks made to demonstrate?
>>Yeah.
He have to complete the chain
of the story in any way.
>>So did he believe then
that humans and the dinosaurs
lived together, or
something like that?
>>Well, I believe
part of the story
may be not humans exactly,
but people from outer space
had been here a long time ago,
maybe watching the dinosaurs
here.
And someone could draw it on.
But maybe it's true,
maybe it's fiction.
>>But what about his book?
He wrote also that book,
"Message of the Ica Stones."
>>Yeah.
Well, the book is,
like I told you,
maybe in his mind
when he told me,
this book's going
to be in the movies
someday maybe in the future.
So I think he had--
>>He wanted his book to
be made into a movie then,
and that's what he thought.
>>Yeah.
>>OK.
And he had his own ideas
of flying saucers at Nazca,
and things like that, right?
>>Yeah.
He have a lot of theories
about the places,
the mysterious places of this
part of the south of Peru,
you know?
And he knew about a
lot, really a lot.
I think he saw in the future
to make us famous maybe
on the world with this story.
So I hope that.
I hope that.
>>He was from Ica, so he
wanted Ica be famous like that.
>>Yeah.
Because we have good
history here, really.
With stories about
Paracas and Nazca,
I think people are going to
be investigating about it
and never going
to get the truth.
Yeah.
>>So you think-- I mean, did he
enjoy fooling a lot of people?
Or I mean, you know?
>>Maybe he play with
the brain of the people.
Yeah, maybe.
Because he was very
intelligent, so maybe it
was his comic movie, you know?
>>His comic movie.
All right.
>>He was laughing all the time.
>>So you never really know what
you're going to find out here
in the deserts of Peru.
We've seen a lot of
strange stuff on this trip.
We saw Dr. Cabrera's strange
cabinet of curiosities.
We saw the weird cone heads
in the Ica Regional Museum.
And then we saw the strange
geoglyphs and lines at Nazca.
It's been a long,
strange trip, but if you
do happen to come
here to Peru, be sure
you occasionally stop at
some of the strange things
that you find along the highway.
[MUSIC PLAYING]